[00:00] So, let me just make sure. Have you guys been getting emails from me at all? The first mail was the only one. Yeah. Is that right? The one that asked us to join the group, that's the only one. Even assignment two, no really. All right. So, that that tells me why I'm not getting any response. And I I supposedly had office hours yesterday, but nobody turned up. So, I was wondering what happened. Uh consider me. Okay. Okay. So, well, see I strangely Okay. So, nobody got this email. H Okay. September 21st. That was a couple of days ago. H Okay. So, I need to figure out what's going on. That Sorry about that. I didn't I thought it's going through and uh uh huh even if you check the group

[01:01] the group does not have any messages on it like announcements or even if you directly go to the room and check your email then we don't have it. Wow. Okay. Okay. And uh I I think a few of you had also individual emails. Uh let me see. Have you been getting any replies from me? Yeah, some some of the individual replies, but I think maybe there's something something the matter with the Google groups. Okay. Yeah, sorry about that. I thought we are uh um I mean uh yeah, I should have gotten worried that nobody was getting back to me. So, but I thought everybody was finding the assignments easy or whatever and no office hours. Anyway, so I spent few hours waiting yesterday and nobody turned up and I think well maybe students are doing very well or uh okay so uh yeah I'll take care of it. Sorry about that. So okay the uh uh maybe then it's a bit too late to announce but uh we do have a extra makeup class today

[02:02] from 6:00 to 7:30. I know couple of you have said you cannot make it but uh how does it look for the rest of you? It's a little short notice was that it is a short notice except there were many notices which didn't quite make through I think uh and I mentioned that it's here in this room and such and such things but yeah I didn't realize that it's uh hasn't gotten through. Is it not possible to be a little earlier like 5:00? Uh just seems like uh it is it seems or you have any conflict. I mean we'll get some food and all that but it's I tried few other things uh with time but it doesn't work. So so uh I was going to do a maybe a one or two demos in the class. I mean it's not so much of new material as much as couple of few demos and experiments and such things of laser and some you know non uh basically broadband emission. And we do some measurements and demonstrate it

[03:02] here some maybe beam spreading and and uh defraction and a little bit of uncertainty principle and that sort of thing. So we wanted to do it in the class today. Yep. So I can't make that but could you post the uh the video now of that class? Yeah. Uh for this extra class I think that's uh makes sense because it's um some of you cannot make it but uh those of you can make it please be here. That's all I can say at this point. And yeah. video being uploaded on the video. No, no, no. It won't be available. Uh uh because uh we're not editing it on the go and all that. Uh but I know many of you have asked uh one of the primary reasons that Cliff and I decided not to do that is because it essentially encourages people not to come to class anymore. And uh that's not the intention of the video note. But uh the thought is at some point later we will post it if you want to review things. Uh but not after every lecture. you're not doing that. Now, if there are cases where uh you're missing

[04:04] for valid reasons for classes for you know uh um for maybe you have to travel for interviews or whatever uh we can make uh exceptions but only on a case by case basis not for everybody. So there was a question. Yeah. Is it possible uh upload all lectures before? Uh the thing is uh we were actually planning to do that except uh uh you will spend a good good amount of 10 or 11 hours watching them instead of preparing for other courses too right well I I don't think they're that spellbinding to watch but still uh if you watch all of them it's going to take up a lot of time and you don't realize but we we could do that especially because of the extra class today we'll uh we'll be recording the extra class I think today right and uh um And then so because it's an in not during the normal class hours we will record it and then we might just do the entire chunk of everything till now uploaded. We might give access to everybody. So yeah more questions. Yep. Um

[05:08] about discover right so it's a good question. I was going to discuss that as the first thing today. Uh there were quite a few questions. In fact, I it's also buried in one of those emails that went vanished into the black hole, I think. Uh so the prelim uh is on next Friday morning right here in the room in this hour. Uh and uh uh the topics that will be covered in the prelim will be all the way till uh essentially uh uh you know this uh kind of chapter 6 of the book but uh uh not uh the entirety of chapter 6. So let me explain what I mean. Uh so chapter six on the is on resonant optical cavities and professor pollock uh actually cliff did discuss this in the last class you know defined a lot of parameters you know FSR finesse and cues and all that stuff right he defined them in the last class about resonant cavities. So um we'll basically uh give you uh uh maybe two problems or two and

[06:10] half problems. Two of them would be kind of very similar to what you have been doing in assignments. You know if you look at the chapter end problems of the book or the year assignment problems very similar to that you know and and it won't be something very different where essentially you can kind of guess what it'll be some maybe cavity so maybe uh calculate u uh you know maybe q knots and omega knots and all that sort of thing right and design it such that it's stable or something like that you can kind of guess what we have covered till now we're going to ask you that now resonant optical cavities uh I think the fact that the ideas have already been discussed though I have not asked you to solve too many problems from this chapter yet. Uh uh we will kind of uh I'm saying that we'll cover maybe you can consider just be aware of what's in this chapter. We won't kind of probe you very uh deeply about the concept of this chapter but everything before that. Does that make sense? Yeah. Chapter 4 has not been covered. Oh yeah sorry forgot no

[07:11] chapter 4. Cross that out. We are not not doing chapter 4. It's not like uh um the concepts are very alien actually it flows but we decided to leave it out because uh goes into far more details into beam shapes and all that which uh I think for a for this class we don't intend to cover uh uh so chapter 4 leave it out 1 through you know 1 2 3 5 and just be aware of six just look through it six is primarily definitions and all that it's not uh uh okay so that's that's prelim It'll be a written exam uh uh basically 50 minutes in the class uh next Friday. And the second thing is uh uh Cliff will do a review of uh uh uh essentially a review for the exam on Wednesday next week. So the Wednesday class no new things just review solving some problems addressing questions and all that from me. Okay. So that's we will do that as well. So our goal really in this course has been to uh kind of

[08:14] get uh get to the laser as fast as possible because what happens is many courses you end up like three and a half uh uh months towards the end of the semester and you still haven't completely seen the laser right so essentially we've been trying to get to the laser as soon as possible so we've kind of going through uh running through the first few chapters but I think you have seen most of these concepts before so not spending too much time. If you do have uh uh concerns and questions, please come by. As I said, and some of you are already using some of the office hours if if the emails get through and if you know when it is. So, uh uh but uh uh uh okay. So in that in that spirit what we I'm going to do today and maybe cliff a little bit in the next class is to finish up basically the entire all the boxes that we need to take to understand the laser. We started with uh uh understanding propagation of electromagnetic waves and

[09:15] uh um uh how um any laser beam that has a finite spot size must not be a plane wave. A plane wave has no diameter. Right? So it's all spread out. So you form gausians and then you see hermite gausians and all that and you have the beam propagation. Then we defined all all kinds of parameters. All that was electromagnetic theory and understanding how light uh uh uh can can uh um maintain coherence maintain uh uh finite beam weight etc. uh for uh uh and to to make the region of I mean the active part of the laser and then we designed uh cavities stability of those essentially mirrors and how how to deal with them mathematically ABCD parameters etc etc right and the last thing that uh cliff was covering was resonant optical cavities and uh what you guys covered really was uh defined uh that that once you have created if you want to make a laser we need to have define our

[10:16] frequencies and the way you choose out those frequencies is by by your uh optical resonator right so so you put it inside uh uh uh a mirrors and and then let's say distance is d and I think if described in great detail uh you can only fit a half number of sorry integer number of half wavelengths inside and that immediately gives rise to this fsr right the free spectral range uh and uh uh if if you actually do remember this is the thing we had also done kind of in the first class as well. So we kind of trying to show uh that if you have a mirror and light bouncing back and forth you will have uh these modes that are allowed right these modes that are allowed and only if your reflectivities of the two mirrors are inf basically are unity you have that right meaning they're infinitely sharp right only certain wave can fit

[11:17] but the moment it's less than unity which is reality which is the reality reflection the reflectivity is not quite one then what do you get here what happens to these you know modes so right so it broadens right except the very important thing is is uh uh well if you if you plot uh transmission and all that so essentially it broadens so depending upon reflectivities right and then the the lower the reflectivity the broader it is right and you have formulas for full length half maxis. So what I'm now plotting is instead of the mode you can plot physically the transmission meaning I have light incident on this side you're like what what are we doing how can you couple in light from a mirror but remember the reflectivity is not one right that means it can let some transmit through you can have light coming from here you can have a you know light source here too generate your light uh but then some of it transmits through and I think you went through all all the facts that it will bounce back

[12:18] and forth and add up all your electric field components. Uh and then when you add them all up uh you get uh how much of it how much of the light energy stays inside the cavity and how much of it makes it outside which is the transmission right through the cavity right so this is what we are plotting the transmission as a function of uh wavelength* d which is uh I think you call theta what is k is 2 pi over wavelength right of the light of the light beam And if you plot it now uh you see that transmission uh if you're uh uh so instead of well okay so I think I'm kind of taking some liberties here let's plot it versus theta and theta now is uh KD and in fact I think you also found that KD is equal to or 2 KD is equal to an integer number * 2 pi is the situation where you'll get the you know peak right

[13:19] an integer number of half wavelengths and That's that's your resonant resonance condition or KD is equal to an integer * pi uh and so on. So essentially 2 pi over wavelength is equal to integer number pi * pi. You cancel those and uh uh uh right. So essentially whenever the cavity length is an integer times wavelength by two I think we're kind of running in circles now but you know that's that's your condition of resonance and because of this is an integer it can be 1 2 3 4 I think you also saw that for a normal you know a meter long uh cavity and say 600 nanometer red laser uh you have you know a couple of million cycles here inside right so Q can be a million or a couple of million and then you have q + 1, q + 2 and q - 1 and so on, right? So what we're doing is plotting the

[14:20] transmission. So theta is k * d and I think you can see from here that uh k * d is related to how many integers you have here, right? And it's one of those integers that we're looking at. We are plotting the transmission and the kind of the almost uh still to me it amazes it I feel amazed that uh u you know no matter what is the reflectivity uh uh and no matter uh you know what's the distance there are some wavelengths at under which the light essentially comes in and goes through with a unity transmission transmission is actually one so the peak always stays the same the transmission peaks stays the same and uh if you remember uh your transmission you derive these and you can you know kind of uh uh I I forget all the details 1 - r1 r2 square 2 + 4 something like that right and the sin square theta let me

[15:23] just make sure I'm not uh screwing this up one yeah oh So that's the transmission as a function of the wavelength or the function of uh you know theta which is k * d. I think you see that theta is uh a mixture of two things d and lambda like the cavity length and the wavelength of the laser that you are kind of shining. So it's a mixture of the two two quantities. Typically, if you have fixed your wavelength, you're changing your D in the cavity length, right? And then then that's how you're changing or tuning your transmission. But the fact is I mean uh for uh uh if if uh uh I I think Cliff already discussed this that if under under that condition when the uh uh an integer number of half wavelengths fit inside this the transmission is one and and uh now this is actually a very interesting phenomena uh and and uh uh for good reason. It is

[16:24] called resonant transmission, right? So and and the fact that it happens for light was well known for a very long time. You know, I mean this quarter wave transformers and all that make use of this. So if you have a glass plate here which has a certain reflection and a certain refractive index and all I think you know that if you have a quarter wave uh quarter wavelength inside or you know or integer of a half wavelengths fit inside you will have perfect transmission for vertical incident. That's a very well-known fact for and now for electrical devices you use this in transformers when you have you know a 60 Hz signal going through and you want it to completely transmit but you also want to amplify a little bit or whatever you don't want any reflections you do this as well for electrical signals. So there was a question. Yeah. Yeah. Is R the reflectivity now? It's mod square of the reflection coefficient. So it's the power. Okay. So it's not the curvature.

[17:25] Oh. Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So I think probably uh Cliff said that he tried to drill down that every parameter that we had earlier is now different you know. So exactly right. This is reflectivity. So essentially if your electric field reflected is small R * electric field incident then big R now is mod R R squ that's what it's the reflectivity and it's kind of this ratio of N1's and N2s if you remember air N1 - N2 so uh unfortunately this is how you know things are going I think the most uh abused notation was small Q or something like that which used to be the beam parameter and now it's the integer of the of the anyway it's I think uh you know with with a more evolved structure of language we can have a more uh um anyway we have finite number of alphabets so and a lot more concepts so that's where uh the degeneracy comes in for this all right so big R here is reflectivity it's reflectivity and obviously the max is

[18:27] one and uh and uh okay so so what I wanted to uh say is uh this resonant transmission is uh actually true for uh not just electromagnetic waves. Uh so with the advent of quantum mechanics which will be a part of something we discussed today. Uh it's true for it's found to be true for particles through as well for particle transport. If you have particles that have wave nature and now quantum mechanics says well that means it's all of every particle has wave nature. So an electron going through if it has sees a certain kind of barrier it can actually resonantly go through as well. You know if the barrier length is an integer number of half wavelengths of the electron wavelength it can go through and those would be called resonant tunneling diodes. In fact uh that's a electrical device you can measure them at room temperature. Indeed you can see the transmissions at room temperature and they're used to make uh just like we use this idea here to make a laser light oscillator. They used to make electronic oscillators as well. So, so very fast uh half terraertz

[19:28] I mean very very fast uh electronic oscillators the concepts are exactly the same you take the electron resonant telling diode put it inside another cavity and you try to amplify you know a certain select out one mode and amplify it again right so so uh the one point I wanted to make which uh uh was uh uh not discussed is uh the main idea of the laser really is uh uh is is we have the uh we have chosen a wave wavelength. We have chosen a mode now and I think you know now that the gain spectra of of any any material you put inside without the gain gain medium there is really no lazing. So the gain medium that you put inside will pro will provide amplification or gain right if you have for you know n number of photons coming in you have probably uh maybe two n number of photons going out of that so that's a fixed gain of two and that will happen for every pass every time the

[20:28] electromagnetic wave goes across uh let me sketch it here in a little better way let's say let's say that the entire region is a gain medium. It's it's a gas. Let's say I mean generally it's a part of it but let's say it's all of it. And so uh under under that picture your electromagnetic wave if I were to plot the electric field uh it's going to look you know like that right and I know there's a million cycles but I'm just doing a finite number. But uh if I fill it with my gain media which may which means I have maybe some atoms that are providing gain then this electric field is start going to start to grow when it moves to the right the amplitude of electric field starts increasing right that's the classical picture of a gain media so essentially you start kind of going like that it still meets your boundary conditions and all that but its amplitude starts growing that's a classical picture of gain the quantum mechanical Picture of gain is as it goes through every time

[21:30] you know you get a stimulated emission you get two photons out. So the number of photons is increasing. That's the quantum mechanical picture. As you go to the right the number of photons is increasing. Classically the amplitude of electric field is increasing and both describe the same picture. This is not no difference really. and and uh uh as a result we'll say that uh with one pass uh if you remember the if I were to start out here and go here and reflect back and come back here again right so that's one round trip right if I want to uh so I I travel uh um by j 2 * k * d so that's my normal phase that that I accumulate right uh and then you have these two uh reflections I think you talked about gamma 1 gamma 2 in fact uh yeah so reflectivity right gamma what gamma squ that's the reflection coefficient gamma so I I

[22:31] think those things you saw but this was all without gain so you you have an incident electric field and then it goes across the amplitude stays the same but you uh uh the moment you hit this you get a little reduction in amplitude you hit that you get a little more reduction in amplitude and this is the toal phase. So that's the electric field. But the moment I introduce a gain medium, every time I go through uh a path like that, my electric field is going down because of these reflections and losses. What what do the reflection uh mean? I mean part of it is leaking out here, part of it is leaking out there. So little bit leaks out. Some photons leak out. Therefore, the electric field amplitude just goes down a little bit, right? Does that make sense? I mean that's a classical quantum analogy here. uh but uh now I'm actually feeding in and increasing it. So I have gain too. So this is loss and then I will have gain now. Okay. And every pass will have a gain. The gain we are going to write G. It's the power gain. It's not the electric field gain just like reflection

[23:32] coefficient. It's the power reflection coefficient. This is the field. Power is square of field. Right? So similarly square root of gain is the increase in electric field. But uh once I uh so so this is what will happen. And so every time I go through once I increase square root of G because I've made one pass through the system then I go back again another square root of G. So every double pass or a round trip is going to give me a total gain of G not does that make sense? Electric field uh gain. So if I were to do one pass from left to right uh if I have gain then it's uh E on the left time square root of G KN, right? But power uh uh uh well I just say I mean o over some length l I I'm not not uh uh going to specify which length right and then obviously if you do two uh 2 * d which is you know one full pass then then I get a twice of that so this

[24:33] essentially goes as uh the power law as you can see I mean every every pass is is 2d every round trip is 2 * d and that gives you a g not yeah there was a question Yeah. Oh, so yeah. So it's just you get a gain of G not if if there's like a round trip. Exactly. Yeah. The total gain in a round trip is G not now, right? And once you take that into account and do the same math that Cliff did to figure out this transmission coefficient, you have a couple of small changes. You will have a G knot here. You you'll get a G knot here. And I think you can probably see where you know essentially you'll get this factor also. Multiply that one and then square them and all that. And then uh you know I I think I've wrote written that down there plus 4G KN that's that's how it changes that those are the three new gain terms that appear and obviously it was one before which you couldn't see you know because it there was no gain material so there was no amplification of photons. So this is the new uh uh expression for uh a cavity. We're

[25:36] getting very close to the laser now because now we're introducing a gain material. And this is the transmission coefficient for a light incident from the left uh light beam to go through the cavity to transmit through the cavity if it has gain. So yeah, there's question what is the order of sorry how large is g? How large? Very good point. So a question is how large is g? Uh uh so uh so if you have no no gain at all it's one right and uh uh typically we'll see you know something like this would be a good number we could make it very good by doing this so it's like 3% or something like that and it depends I mean some materials can have very high gain semiconductor lasers typically have much higher gain but uh the the typical numbers are slightly larger than one 1.0 0 something and all that I think. Yeah. So here's a good example uh from your book again uh uh that if I have

[26:37] uh so numbers here are like 1.04 1.035 and all that. This is uh from your book showing uh uh what it's showing is if I have one watt of power incident from the left and uh uh obviously uh uh if I have no gain and I have one watt of power incident from the left if I have no gain meaning G is one. So just remember no gain doesn't mean loss. I mean so uh this media in between I'm assuming it doesn't have loss inside. There's obviously loss of photons at the two ends that we have taken into account. That's your R1's and R2s. But in the laser cavity, there's no loss. There's only uh and then the worst I can do is put gain is equal to one. No photon g increase in photon number. In that case uh if I have one what incident on the left I think I you talked about Cliff talked in the last class that if I have one watt incident on the left and in

[27:38] steady state after all the bouncing is done everything has settled down you have one watt going out to the right that's steady state but what you have here inside is a huge buildup of of number of watts inside is it's storing a lot of energy it's energy storage you could have uh and that that's essentially a measure of Q you can have you 1,00 watts inside here. the energy stored here with lot of loes and you know uh yeah so so so energy uh uh so in under steady state if I were to look at power as a function of distance here here's your mirror here's your other mirror so I have maybe one watt incident from the left I'm plotting power now in space uh you know qualitatively but and what I'm saying is uh inside the cavity you have a huge buildup of laser power or electromagnetic power and then outside whatever comes in is going out again. That's that's steady state, but you have a huge huge buildup. And and uh if you suddenly turn off this thing, you

[28:39] you suddenly turn off your input light source, there's a huge amount of energy still sticking around, but it's not going to stick around forever, right? How long is it going to stick around? That's your photon lifetime, right? How long is it going to stick around? Basically, again, it's going to do bounce bounce, but then every time some of it leaks out, leaks out, and there's a finite number of times when it'll go to zero, right? So that's photon lifetimes, right? very similar to a LC oscillator you know you get L and C and then uh if you have the LC oscillator uh the essentially um you know it's oscillating but then you have the decay with because of the resistance if you turn off your voltage supply it will decay down and that's a RC sort of time constant it goes down right very similar to that the photon lifetime is equivalent of the RC life lifetime of any LCR circuit exactly the same yeah Now uh and and I think you saw that there's a characteristic lifetime which is uh one over your FSR the free spectral range u meaning 2 * d over c is the one pass photon time right

[29:44] and every time you have a certain reflection reflection coefficient and all that so the photon lifetime looks something like that right right maybe a few and and uh because you're losing a little bit every time now uh as you can see now uh the uh moment I put in gain into the system it's very different business because uh if I have no gain the maximum transmitted power this is transmitted power is equal to the incident power here the problem is set up that incident power is one one watt so maximum you can transmit is 1 watt you cannot have more the only way you can have more than what's coming in is if you have gain in the material so we add gain gain goes from 1.0 to 1.02 O2 and you have this as your transmitted power gain is equal to 1.03. This is transmitted. It's essentially by the time you reach 1.035 just put this formula in. This is essentially P out over P in. And if you hit resonance, you are transmitting 9 W of power with one watt in coming in, right? One watt. So, so the idea is

[30:46] I have one watt coming in here and what's coming out here is 9 watts. And how is that possible? That's that's very weird, right? Right. So yeah, there was a question. Wait, so is there a limit to the amount of gain you can have to power? Uh um well uh so yes definitely there's a limit but uh uh so in principle at least mathematically it would look like you can get g is equal to infinity the moment you put in you know uh rather the transmission you can uh if you if you g if your gain becomes larger than 1 / r1 r2 you can show that this will blow up at resonance when theta is you know kd right all that it means is uh let me first explain this part how is it that you have more power going out than coming in. Now remember gain doesn't come for nothing. I mean gain you have to create population inversion without without it there's no gain. I mean you don't get gain if you don't have population inversion which means I have to create inside this

[31:46] region uh atoms which have an electron that is sitting at a higher energy level than than than its equilibrium. So what it means is I have already been I've been pumping this set of atoms here and creating my gain medium by with a broadband light source. Maybe I kind of I've excited the electrons here. They're all sitting at the excited state, right? So what does that mean? I have a steady state input of DC power going in just to uh create the population inversion and create situation conducive to provide me gain. So I have what you can consider if you draw want to draw an analogy with electrical gain in transistors and all you always need to bias a transistor under DC. Your gain is always in AC. So you you get a small signal in but the gain comes basically you are sucking power out of this broadband light source and putting it into this single mode. Right? So it's there's no violation of any energy conservation here. Right? So

[32:47] you can have more power going out but coming in. Why? Because you sucked out power from all these other wavelengths from the broadband light source and you put it into that mode which you selected by your cavity. So that's the idea of this right? Does that make sense? So that's the general idea of any sort of gain medium. I mean gain is uh uh there you know well of course it's not violating any energy conservation laws but that's where it's coming from. And uh I physically you can get very high gain but typically you'd be limited by things like how many atoms you have that provide gain right that will saturate uh if you remember we did a very quick estimate of if you look at the mode volume of the laser it's restrictive you know it has finite size and all that you go from 000 mode to higher modes uh then the number of atoms inside there those things actually limit the gain it's not uh so and fundamentally when g exceeds 1 / R1, R2, this thing blows up. All that it physically means is

[33:47] now you can reach a situation where you can uh you know uh so remember the laser would have broadband exitation or electrical injection that's providing the energy and now the picture we started out with is I want to have an incident beam and I have output beam right and the beauty of having uh uh you know when g becomes larger than 1 / r1 r2 do is you can have no incident beam and it's still going to output power basically in some sense you're doing 0 * infinity but not quite I mean so all it means is we are pumping in power in we don't need anything input and so we can turn off our input and it will still oscillate you know so it's it's a natural oscillator it's taking DC power converting into one mode so that's really what it means when it blows up right is that clear or okay good So uh and uh uh

[34:49] uh all right so so that that that's that's uh important question and you can get your full half max with the gain essentially you had g not is equal to one before and you just you know this is your full half max you can calculate those things from the same way you take sin theta near your resonance you know theta is like 2 pi plus a little delta and you can expand that you know all that and you get theta plus and theta is where does this go to half of it when this term becomes equal to that term you get half and all that so full with half max comes out from there okay so now the main question the biggest uh uh physics question now is what is responsible for the gain and I think we have already said it's the spontaneous uh uh or sorry stimulated emission and now we're going to start off with the uh getting into the real heart of the problem and say how how do we uh write down what is the expression of gain where does it come from and uh um and and uh how do I design materials

[35:49] that have more gain uh what are the things you have to fight in um broadening and all that inogenous broadening broad so we're going to actually look at the uh the more quantum mechanical details now of gain right where does gain come from but I want to stress that till now meaning uh so we are kind of here now so we just finished cavity with gain uh I think with uh there's supposed to be an example and I think this was our example that one watt in and line watts out and all that. So that's our example here. Okay. So we have essentially finished all things that you need to know to make a laser know cavity gain uh resonance uh stability you know and understand polymers. But now we get into details of the uh idea of gain and we start with the quantum mechanics of atomic radiation. So that's what we're going to start with now. This will not be covered in the prelim. So it's definitely out uh of prelim but I want to get it started now. And uh uh um and

[36:52] I think uh on Monday Cliff will continue uh a little bit of this as well. So yeah, okay. So before I move forward any any questions on on uh just the idea of of what we talked about here any questions or and uh uh okay so if not let's move move forward with uh with atomic radiation and this is uh again chapter 7 just wanted to say that we we are really following the book closely So um it'll do a lot of good if you read it and I think you most of you are so so that's that that's good. So please follow that as well. You can always append it with some other uh sources uh to read from. So um we get back to something that we discussed in probably the second class uh which is uh um how did the idea of uh um stimulated emission or gain come from

[37:52] and photon gain and photon gain comes from first looking at situation where there's no gain just looking at uh the classic problem of uh black body radiation. So uh uh here's the black body radiation problem uh in in you know in its uh plank version of it. So I I'll explain what I mean by that. So I I have a see I used to be able to draw proper cubes but all right so here's a it's not a cube maybe a more of a rectangular cavity. Uh what do we mean by cavity? Well, just think of it as a metal box. Uh, and inside it, uh, there's there's air or or there's vacuum inside it. And, uh, uh, the dimensions of this box are A, B, and D, right? Lengths, the three lengths A, B, and the length along this direction is D, right?

[38:54] So uh by whatever means uh inside this metal box and then this vacuum inside uh I've created uh electromagnetic waves. I have light inside there. By whatever mean maybe I have a light bulb inside shining or whatever it is. Maybe the atoms uh are of the metal box are vibrating because of heat or something like that. Uh and and uh uh so so I have electromagnetic waves going back and forth because these are metals. I think you know right away that it'll uh form standing waves in that direction, standing waves in this direction and standing waves in that direction. Why? Because a metal inside a metal the electric field is zero. Right? Therefore, if I have electric field oscillating uh so so uh essentially my electric field must go to zero here and electric field must go to zero here. So that's that's my boundary condition. It it's if you think of electrical circuits, you're you're you're shorted here. It's a transmission line and and you're basically short at the end. That

[39:54] that's what it means. It's the same thing for light. It's the same thing as electromagnetic wave in a circuit. It's short. The electric field is zero. Here the voltage is zero. Right? Same deal. Okay. So uh now the question of black body radiation is I create a little tiny uh opening or a hole here and let's say this is a large box and then I have I I I put in a spectrometer and measure as a function of say frequency the amount of light wave coming out. So this is really the axis I'm plotting. And then I I measure the intensity of radiation coming out, light coming out as a function of the frequency. Create a little hole, measure it. And what you'll measure is well, it's going to look something like that. Right? So so that that's how it's going to look. There'll be a peak at a certain frequency and then it's going to go down. Now this is actually not a

[40:54] hypothetical or gadankan experiment. This is something that Max plank was doing uh while he was consulting with uh industry where they were using indeed ovens you know real ovens for melting iron or I forget exactly what it was but it was where these walls would be at few thousand you know a couple of thousand° C or something like that very hot and it and then they would they would essentially were really trying to prevent the loss of heat because they wanted this to be efficient and all that and all the heat was radiating out as light. I mean, not all the heat. I mean, a lot of it was reading out as light. But uh and then by that time in uh late 1890s and early 1900s, people had figured out how to build really precise spectrometers. And the reason to build good spectrometers was from astronomy. They were trying to look at, you know, expanding universe and all that stuff. But then they put the spectrometer here and they measure it and look like that, right? And then uh so as you increase the temperature it it actually goes out it

[41:55] stretches it goes higher and the peak goes a bit to the right. So so so it shifts like that the radiation shifts like that if you increase the temperature. So so that's black body radiation. That's the word for it. Black body radiation. If you're at uh uh 4,000 Kelvin that's how it looks. 4500 you know 5,000 Kelvin. Uh sorry I I think I said it wrong. this peak shifts to the left and that that's that's not right. Yeah, the peak goes to the left. Yeah. And anyway, I'm plotting on a little tilted scale here. Uh so that's block black body radiation. And way before max plank, people already had figured out that if you plot this frequency as a function of any small window of du here, you take a little du right and plot how much energy do I have. the so so-called radiation energy density or spectral density. Uh this people already knew looked like this. I let me just write that down. 8 pi uh uh

[42:59] h bar uh no not h bar h cq uh sorry c cubed time uh frequency cubed 1 / e ^ h new / kt minus one. They already knew it. In fact, they already knew plank's constant too. I mean, there's uh just one sec. So, they already knew plank's constant as well because they knew speed of light. They knew the frequency or the wavelength of light. They knew the temperature you're sitting at. So, they could extract what is a h. They already knew it was 6, you know, whatever that is 6.63 10 - 34 JW. They already knew that before plan. Okay. Yep. to the question. Is this graph still in frequency? Cuz on that it's in the wave. Yeah, it uh Oh, yeah, that's right. I was getting confused. You're right. You're very good point. In frequency, it does go to the right. You're right. Wavelength, it goes to the left. I was a bit confused. That's right. Frequency it

[44:00] does increase. This is kind of the peak goes as to the power 4. It's the wind's law and all that sort of thing. And so, good point. Okay, it does it does uh increase uh uh in in frequency space but essentially the whole thing goes up and the peak shifts and uh I think it's always good to remember more is energy you'll always blue shift go higher frequency so and and or lower wavelengths right so thanks thanks for pointing it out so so uh people already knew this uh energy radiation density and and uh the problem though was uh uh uh electromagnetic theory Maxwell's equations was incapable of explaining this. That that was the problem. Maxwell's equations when you put it together with classical thermodynamics, it was incapable of explaining it. And that's what we want to first see. Why? And how did it how did Maxplank uh what hypothesis solved it? I think you you know well spoiler I mean of course we know that energy is not uh now we know that energy in every mode a photon is

[45:02] not uh a continuous number but it comes in a discrete number of photons in any mode. The moment you make that assumption I'm going to jump ahead a little bit. The moment you say that in any mode of electromagnetic spectrum if I can have only an integer number of h new integer number and not a continuous number of then this falls out right away right but if you don't make that assumption and you say that well I have a continuous number I have thermodynamically KT or whatever you get these uh what's called a relay genes law or ultraviolet catastrophe and all that sort of thing. So, so you're going we're going to see that very easily right now in whatever time is left now. So, uh so the idea is uh very simple. By now we are experts in uh realizing that this is actually nothing different from a standard cavity that we have been talking about all the time. Right? So this is if I have a distance D, you have your FSR, right? Free spectral range. If you if your distance of the cavities along the Z direction and your distance is D, then I think you already know your

[46:04] allowed modes are separated by C over 2D. That's your free spectral range. Right? Now all that has happened in this box. It's a three-dimensional version of the same problem 3D. In this direction, I have length A. So I'll fit an integer number of half wavelengths again in in A. Right? in this direction integer number of half luence of B right and in that direction an integer number of halfence of D and that's all there is to it there are three three modes there are three uh FSRS so you can kind of plot it now in three directions right so you get a 3D grid of points now does that make sense so you had only Q earlier only one Q Q + 1 Q - 1 and all that now you have let's call it m is the integer for this and uh oh I think cliff always he wants to use n right so he says New Mexico

[47:04] right n m and maybe p along that direction three integers choose choose anything n and p and uh your frequencies which is omega let me write that down now uh I I can do it you know heristically that uh you realize that a half number of integer wavelengths must fit inside there. That's all there is to it. I mean right that part is clear. So uh uh so so essentially I I would say that for k along x which is 2 pi over lambda. Now lambda I want to write it as lambda x but I think physically you understand what I mean. It's it's kind of if I if I have a wave going only in the x direction then this is the wavelength. It doesn't have any y or z component. Then k uh uh so so what will be the values allowed? N * lambda x / 2 is equal to d oh sorry is equal to a a is your x coordinate right. So that's yeah

[48:05] n number fit there right similarly you will have m lambda y / 2 is equal to b and p * lambda z / 2 is equal to d 3 or all it's saying really is your k's along x which is 2 pi by this is now so let me write down your total k total k squared is equal to kx^2 + k y^2 + k z^2. It's very standard way fitting. I think you have seen this probably. Kx² is 2 pi by lambda. So from here you can see 2 pi over lambda x will be you know 2 pi by that. So that's n * uh nx 2 a right. and there's a pi. So, okay, n * p /

[49:07] a, right? You can see that from here. And therefore, that becomes uh pi / a * integer n² + m pi / b. You can kind of run through the rest. It's easy to understand what we're doing. Pi / dn². So, that's your k's and ks are 2 pi by wavelength. Or you can relate it to what I want to do is the frequency or the energy of the photon. That's right. And the frequency and uh K are related through C * K. I think you know that that's for photons. Omega is equal to C * K. If you are going in a material medium, you put in your refractive index down there, right? So that's that's uh uh and then omega is 2 pi times your frequency, right? So take that here. So just have 2 pi n and all that. So what I'm trying to do is convert from k to frequency which is

[50:08] uh 2 pi n / c * new. So I take this plop that in there and I get all my allowed modes my all my fsrs in every three direction. I mean in 3D space I get all of them now. So so what does that give me? 2 pi n / c new^ squ is equal to uh okay let me write this down uh and not worry about time right so so uh you can cancel out your pies uh here and uh let's make another simplicity simplifying assumption that it's a cube you know you can go into a b being different let's also make a equal to b is equal to d is equal to a you know I mean or it's a cube simplifying assumption you don't have to you can evaluate it otherwise as well uh

[51:11] uh I think we're already running into a bit of a problem here because this n is an integer but you know maybe I write it like a n hat or something it's a refractive index here Yeah. So, okay. So, uh all said and done now you can kind of translate these quantities to the right side. Uh your pies go away. Uh your a's all all are a so they all go out as a squ here. And uh uh the end result of all this is uh your new will be let's write that down c over 2 n a * n 2 + m 2 + p ^ 2. So you can write it as n m comma p. So these are discrete modes. Yeah, right. You've got all the points and uh

[52:12] big surprise. What's sitting here? What is that? C over 2A. Forget the refractive index. The free spectral range FSR, right? And makes sense. I mean, FSR is the spacing between any two modes. So, this is spacing the length scale of those modes. And all these go from zero, you know, to infinity. Effectively, these are inteious, discrete points go to infinity. Okay. So, I'll actually I just realized we're out of time. So what I'll do is stop here and just to give you a picture of what we just did. These are all the allowed modes. M P uh I think they have different alphabets now. Anyway, these are integers and these are all points. If all three integers are zero, you are sitting at the origin. If one of them is 1 0 0, you are on the x-axis y axis. So you have this whole grid of points and each point here represents one mode of light that fits inside this blackboard. Each mode. And then next we are going to assign energy to each of it. and then see how much of it comes out is essentially for each mode weighted by its energy. Sum them you should be able to get this. So that's what we're going

[53:12] to do next and and show that that's how it leads to the plank's hypothesis. So uh 6 p.m. here those who can make it I'll see you here. We'll have some pizza and drinks and all that stuff and uh uh all right and your homeworks are here. Those you have not collected the first homeworks are here.