[00:01] Okay. So, uh uh let's see. Um those of you who were not there, uh class uh before I think was this Monday, um Professor Pollock handed out these uh um uh second uh lab description. Uh so, uh please pick them up and I'll I'll actually post it and uh on on the website as well. uh and I hope you uh have gotten started with uh some of the design and please contact him and uh you know take your design to him and he'll uh uh discuss that with you and then uh you basically will uh decide on a time to go in and and and uh uh uh make the laser uh for for this lab. Uh the second uh or rather the first lab uh I think all of you are um finished the lab. So uh I will uh suggest uh uh turning in your reports this Thursday uh this week on Thursday

[01:02] uh and uh uh I think a single report per group uh so please work together and uh uh submit it to me. Yep. You said the due date was Tuesday. So did I say that? Yeah. I mean on the like on the posted Okay then. So sorry. Yeah. Um let's see. I mean uh the way to look at it is the longer you take to write this up the more you delay your lab too. So I I I I I uh think if you are done by Tuesday please turn it in. That's absolutely great. Yeah. I mean the nobody's going to stop you for turning it in earlier. So uh but uh okay. So if I did say Tuesday I I'll check it. But uh turn it in by Thursday. I mean it's it's a I think you have the data you have to plot it and uh there's uh you know just write a coherent report on that. Uh okay so uh actually professor Paul and I did discuss a little bit of what to do uh in

[02:02] uh the last three classes this week and here's what we uh uh decided to uh um kind of uh finish up the course uh with with the following things. One is to give you an idea of uh uh what are the current uh applications uh of of the lasers that we have uh discussed till now. We have discussed a lot about the physics of lasers uh and lately a bit about semiconductor lasers. Uh today we'll discuss a little bit about uh some of the details of the semiconductor laser but more so about how do you design uh uh the laser aimed at a communication system you know at a very uh high data rate communication system for example today and uh you know digging down to the basics what are the design uh parameters that uh typically you play with to to uh make it possible. So uh the first uh I want to give that uh an overview or in some sense a survey of that uh uh rather than getting too

[03:03] deep into any of the details. Uh and uh the purpose of that is to kind of uh finish the course uh this is a four-level course if you might. So our goal also is to give you a a a fair idea of what is it that we did not cover in the course. You know, I mean, obviously every topic has uh uh a certain degree of breadth and a certain degree of depth you can get into, but I want to uh we we decided it also important to show you a couple of things that we didn't get too deep into, but uh there are still current areas of research. there a lot of open questions and I want to kind of uh show show those to you as well by digging into the uh uh what are the um I I shouldn't say completely not understood phenomena but uh what are the things that uh still need uh uh quite a bit of work in terms of understanding in in the fundamental aspects of uh such photonic uh phenomena. Okay. So we'll start with uh where we uh kind of ended

[04:04] in the last class. Essentially what we developed was a very uh engineering or a phenomenological approach for lasers and uh that approach where we uh kind of did a rate equation for electrons and a rate equation for photons. So rate equation for electrons so that I inject a certain amount of electrons into the active region and some of them recombine by spontaneous emission process and uh uh the rest recombine by stimulated emission process and the stimulated emission part is is uh proportional to the power that is in the radiation field or in the photons and that part which is lost by electrons I mean you lose electrons to stimulated emission is gained by photons. So that term appears here as a positive. This is the power in the photon field or the light field and it appears here as a positive part. But then you also generate photons by spontaneous emission. Essentially this also appears here. Then you lose some from the cavity. That's your useful output power of a laser for example. And

[05:06] by combining these two and solving it a steady state you you end up with the output power as a function of injection current that looks something like this. there's a threshold and then above it you get a output power that's linear. You also saw this in your experiment in the in the first lab. The output power of the laser looks something like that. You have spontaneous emission and then you kick in with the stimulated emission. Now because you have the rate equations you can also say that instead of a DC current I inject an AC current with a certain frequency then will the output power follow at that frequency and that's the dynamics of a laser. So if I inject a AC on oscillating current what happens to the output power does do the photon numbers or the output power in light also oscillate with with time and it does except that it doesn't do that uh there's a certain frequency limits to at how fast you can do that and and that that kind of is an expression that comes about again by feeding in uh you know the input current as e to the^ j omega t and and tracking

[06:06] what is output power as a function of this frequency. And you get output power divided by input current has a certain in a frequency response. And at very low frequencies if you are below about a gigahertz you are okay. The output power really follows the input current. But above that you have a resonance at a certain frequency and then you have a decay and then then if you try to do it too fast it doesn't quite follow the output power doesn't follow the input uh uh current. So that's a that's a theoretical model or or or or this this particularly is a phenomenological model. How does it look in a real laser? Uh for example, if you pick up a semiconductor laser, here's a laser diode as an example. Uh it could be edge emitting. It could be surface emitting. Uh uh uh and then you have your gain medium. You have your mirrors. Typically you you want if you want to select a certain frequency, you have what you call a the name would be a mode selection filter. It could be one of these fabric peroetalon or something that you put in.

[07:08] In a semiconductor, it's basically just a edged uh uh uh mea that does that job for you uh in in in the process. And uh based on the gain medium, you have your whole gain spectrum. You calculated that in your uh last assignment. The gain spectrum of a semiconductor uh uh gain gain uh uh structure which either could be a bulk P and junction or it could be quantum wells or quantum wires whatever be it. So you have a gain spectrum that may look like this as a function of frequency or wavelength. Here it's plotted as a function of wavelength and based on uh uh the cavity size right the size of the mirrors and the cavity you have your FSR which is all these lines here allowed modes or cavity modes. So this is something we've been discussing through the whole semester, right? And then uh by by choosing maybe aon or or or quite a few other designs as well, you can select out a particular mode. It's a mode selection filter and and kind of reject all the others, you know. So so that's that's the idea. And then you get a

[08:09] single mode uh lazing with a semiconductor laser. And then the output power versus current would look like that. Here's uh experimental data. output power versus uh uh uh injection current you are generating one in your current uh you know lab one as well. So, so that's the uh uh couple of other things that happen. Uh till here you have spontaneous emission. If you take this and plot it in a log scale, that's how it looks logarithmically. You still have output power at very low currents below threshold. But that's spontaneous emission. That's not coherent light. It's a LED sort of behavior. And then when you hit threshold, you have very sharp turn on and then then then essentially uh it locks into this is the laser output. Now this output is a laser with a certain slope which is called the differential efficiency. And when that happens your spontaneous emission or or the carrier uh you know uh the gain was increasing as you basically you increase the gain. Remember your gain starts out as loss when you do not when you do not inject any carriers and then you inject

[09:10] more and more pull the quasify levels into the bands and then you flip sign from negative to positive and it becomes gain. Right? and and then now uh the gain increases uh and then at some point it actually clamps and it doesn't increase any further beyond the threshold. Similarly the carrier density increases and then it clamps. Essentially all it means is be beyond the threshold of the laser you still have spontaneous emission but that's locked no more uh than what it was below the threshold you know and and the carry density locks and all that and the output power looks like that. So these are experimental data. Here's an experimental data of the you know frequency curve uh the how fast can you modulate uh and then you can see that as you inject more current you can kind of push it a bit to the right uh that depends on the uh uh you know denominator and and then here you're kind of looking at the resonance and also the decay of of this is for example a vertical cavity uh surface emitting laser or a vixel uh as an example but all edge emitting lasers will also do

[10:10] that in general Uh okay. So uh that's uh um that is an example of semicond laser and what I want to uh spend a few minutes talking about are some of the internal design parameters of the laser. Uh so the gain spectrum we have already talked about you design it by uh choosing the uh active region quantum well size thickness material and all that. That'll design your gain spectrum for a semiconductor laser for atomic laser I think we discussed earlier what atoms do you have you know neodyium and they they they design the gain spectrum right but the FSR we know is designed by the geometrically by the size of the cavity in a semiconductor laser or by the mirror size and reflectivities and all that and the uh so so let's look at a little bit of the shaping of the electromagnetic field and uh again I'll say that we are talking a bit uh I'm kind of it's a survey of couple of

[11:10] topics in chapter 12 of your book not going too deep into any one of them but just a survey of a few topics in chapter 12 and it says advanced topics but really it is a topic to uh to design uh the flow of light inside materials uh there are uh there's another course at least in ECE where uh it's on optical waveguides which where you go into far more details into into molding the flow of light inside material materials here. We're going to just do a quick few survey but specifically aimed at a laser. What are the designs uh rules that you need for a laser? Okay. So I will uh start by uh just uh showing uh a very basic idea of the uh of the waveguiding. I've briefly mentioned this a couple of times earlier but essentially in the laser you have a P and junction. You have a active region which is this stripe here and you're injecting current to push the quasifi levels FN and FP to get gain. And when you inject current uh the the gain is only in the region that current is

[12:11] flowing outside the region where where you are not injecting any carriers. That is still a lost region. It's just absorbing. There's no gain in those regions. Right? Because your uh uh quasifi levels are still very far from the band edges. You have not achieved population inversion outside here because there are no no electrons flowing into those regions. So the current flows, it spreads a little bit. If you don't confine it, it will spread a little bit because of you know just Ohm's law sort of resistance spreading and then you get a gain in a in a restricted window of this uh material. Now in the in the medium then because you have gain and you have electrons and holes now you have re combination and photons are generated and uh these photons start moving around and they want to go every which way. They want to go that way, that way. They also want to go sideways, right? And uh uh uh but then you can shape or you can direct the motion of these photons by playing with the refractive indices of of the material. So in a semiconductor typically what we are using is this

[13:13] active region which is a thickness of D which is you know that one here that is a smaller band gap material. So it has a higher refractive index. You know this is refractive index plot. uh refractive index within this region is slightly higher than the larger band gap regions here and here. This is a double hetroructure sort of laser and and therefore uh uh because of this mismatch in refractive index the electric field uh of the light wave or the photon wave is is going to be shaped by by it you know by the refractive index. Okay. And this problem is very similar uh it's a classical problem. If you have a difference in refractive indexes, how does light flow? Right? And and that's a classical problem, a classical electromagnetic theory problem. And but it's exactly analogous to you know the particle in a box problem in quantum mechanics is exactly the same problem really right. So what will happen is light wants to be in a in electrons want to be in a region of very small potential whereas light wants to be in a region of a high refractive index. And uh uh we'll we'll just briefly see that

[14:15] the equation is you know Maxwell's equation is very similar to this Roinger equation here. Essentially the light wants to be here but then a part of it will leak out. There will be venison and tails outside in the uh lower refractive index regions. We'll see that here it behaves as a sign you know this this is a field electric field profile square of it is the intensity of light. So uh the the electric field here the profile will go as a sign or a cosine whereas outside here will be an exponentially decaying function. So, so that's that's the same deal as electrons in a you know so so because the form for form of the equation is exactly the same but from here importantly what you can get is a bound on the refractive indices you know essentially that all you'll get is as long as n_sub_1 and n5 this is historical regions 1 3 and five but uh refractive indices of outside regions as long as they are smaller than the refractive index of the internal region you will get wave guiding meaning the light would be guided in this direction

[15:15] instead of going out that way and that way it will be guided along that direction and that's what you want for a edge emitting laser and then that's how you shape the you know a rudimentary way of shaping the the the flow of light to get it to go in the directions you want such that they hit the mirror and get reflected and you get gain again so or rather you get uh lazing I mean gain you can get by injection of current but uh uh you know uh lazing needs feedback so so that's the mirrors give you the feedback so uh if I were to just write down the electromagnetic uh uh you know Maxwell's equations for uh flow for any electromagnetic phenomena uh looks like this right [Applause] uh is equal to uh zero as long as there's no source term here we will come to that later okay so so this is for a region where there are no uh uh you know source terms an electric electric field and similar equation for a magnetic

[16:16] field. You have a spatial llash or double derivative and you have a time or a temporal double derivative. Right? And in general what we say is for wave equations we can write it as a function of space and time as an amplitude. uh let's put in a direction uh you know some direction it's going in say k hat uh and an amplitude of the electric field and then it goes as e ^ minus j you know beta z omega t where omega is the frequency of the electromagnetic wave and then what we're going to say is uh uh this this is the amplitude but the shape of the electric field in this x y and z sort of uh directions uh is captured by this function here. This uh function that's what captures the the shape of the electric field uh in the x y and z plane. Uh this is very similar to what

[17:17] we had done in the beginning of the course for gausian beams. And if you go back and check uh uh uh so we just take this and plug it back in there and uh um what this time derivative term does is it pulls out the you know 2 j omegas to the front. It gives you a minus omega squ and what the spatial derivative here does uh uh so our wave is propagating along the z direction. In other words, okay, that's not good. Okay, so yeah, z is out of the plane here. So it's going uh you know along a stripe out of the plane in this picture. So uh and the spatial derivative for Z gives you uh two factors of this. So Essentially I'm saying that if I take this and plug it in here uh and I get an equation in in this s okay the the the shape of the electric field and the equation looks you know there after a few cancellations in the spirit of the survey at this point it it it looks

[18:17] uh let's write it as omega which is the frequency over c all squared and then there's a refractive index squared as a function of xy. Okay. So minus and this is beta square. Okay. This is how uh basically it's saying that if you assume an electric field of this form to solve maxel's equations in this laser waveguide which is propagating along the z direction you must satisfy this equation. Now right and uh uh and this is essentially just the shape of the electric field. uh and what we real look at it looking at this equation you see that it has two derivatives in x and then you have you know the same function and and some con something that looks uh uh like a very much like a oscillator equation you know it's it's a very much like an equation that looks like d2 of some function over dx² plus some let's say frequency

[19:20] squared f omega square f is equal to zero something like that. Okay. Uh and then that's a oscillator equation, right? Uh uh so it has uh solutions that may that depend on the sign of whatever is sitting here. If this quantity here is if if this is uh uh let me write it this way. this factor if that is uh uh positive this quantity is positive then uh uh you get an equation which you know the double derivative of the function is equal to some negative number times the function itself and you know it's e to the power you know j omega t sort of oscillation or a s or a cosine sort of function right right away you know from there if if this thing is positive you get S is I'm going to write it as approximately as sine

[20:21] of let's call this as uh you know some lambda squared let's say okay this quantity is lambda squar so you get plus b of cosine of that same thing something like that whereas if this thing is negative uh uh Then then uh take it to the other side becomes positive we get a cosine hyperbolic or sin hyperbolics. So that side would look like maybe like c e to the power gamma x plus d e ^ minus gamma x something like that. So so essentially what we are saying is if the refractive index here that's what controls it. If as long as the refractive index is uh u you know Or or in other words the beta which is the wave vector 2 pi by the wavelength. If beta is larger than refractive index then you have a certain

[21:23] way of solution. Yep. Beta is kind of a wave number. The beta is always a wave number. That's right. Yes. So that sometimes you k no. Yes. Yes. Yes. So uh uh to be consistent with the uh with the textbook at this point but it's it's interchangeable. Basically you can use it as K. Uh but generally what what's written as K is sometimes written as J or rather it's beta plus there's a real and imaginary part of it. You know the imaginary part. So you know just at this point do not uh you know consider that part. It's that was that the one with the imaginary part. Uh yeah that's a notation but yeah the imaginary part of it is is what leads to absorption and you know emission and all that. So but here is just the real part 2 pi by wavelength as long as the light is below the refra below the band gap it's not you know absorbing and all that. Okay. So uh this is just to show that uh uh you know if your uh refractive index the refractive

[22:25] index controls which way what shape does the electric field take along this direction which is perpendicular which is the x direction here. So if you know refractive index is large then you know and this term overwhelms that term you have a sign term like this and therefore the electromagnetic field looks like a sign or a cosine term and then outside if it is if refractive index becomes smaller this term becomes smaller than that then you get exponential decay outside so the tails right and and the length scale of these tails are of the order of the wavelength of the light itself. uh so it's not you know for electrons you can cut it off within one angstrom or two angstroms but for light it it is a fraction of the wavelength so it's you know 100 about 100 nanometer or 50 nanometer depends on on the wavelength of light but the physically it's very similar to the ground state of a of a electron in a quantum well that we talked about earlier the shape of it yeah uh okay so uh uh so this way you

[23:25] can guide the uh light because of this region essentially the right? Uh gets confined more in this direction and then it kind of moves along the length of the of the stripe here for example. Okay. So uh the second thing that happens is as you as the light moves along the stripe in in the in the Z direction uh the uh there are some tails I mean these are the two tails of the uh light wave which are in in regions where there may carriers. There are electrons here perhaps holes here N and P regions. And so as a result of interaction of these photons which are outside this you know active region uh with the matter there which electrons or holes or free carriers uh there are some delays associated with it. Essentially you have gain within this region but outside here outside the stripes you have some loss and as a result of that what happens is uh uh the gain spectrum you know as you as you inject carriers you have gain within this region and here's the gain

[24:25] spectrum but then the gain because the gain is proportional if you uh if you go back and look at the gain spectrum as a function of frequency you have a bunch of stuff sitting with the joint density of states and all that but then you have your FC C of E2 minus FV of E1. Right? And this is really directly it is proportional to the amount of injected current you you you push into this material. So the current is primarily flowing between the stripe and the contact underneath. So it doesn't flow very far out this way. So it's just goes almost vertically and then a little bit leaked to the side here. And as a result the gain also kind of takes the shape of the current spectrum and and therefore the gain is is is is large at the you know under the stripe but as you move away it gets low and then you have loss outside it because there's no current flowing this term is negative there so you have loss. Uh so the gain uh as a result uh what happens is uh the the uh the light wave that's propagating is

[25:27] seeing kind of a non-uniform gain profile in in within this region and and as it moves uh the phase front you know phase front which is going back to your ABCD sort of picture the phase front is not quite you know uh when it's moving in this direction the phase becomes curved the in the in the wings here the phase lags a little bit whereas the in the in the top it it actually uh is is uh uh leads the phase leads and therefore this is a equifase surface. So you kind of have a curved uh uh profile and therefore this this essentially is very similar to your ABCD uh you know beam curvature if you if you remember the phase curvature in the top it's very similar to that in fact that's uh in your book in this chapter at least they they connect it to the ABCD parameters you can use ABCD parameters to calculate the the phase front of of a semiconductor edge emitting laser as well and and this this thing is called for in laser parlance very similar to you know uh eye surgery and it's called aigmatism

[26:27] basically just that you know you cannot focus on one point at any time because it's it's out of phase the equifase it's called the aigmatism of a semiconductor laser for example and and then once you come out uh the light actually spreads because outside there is no dilectric wave guiding so you kind of spread out more in this direction because of this uncertainty you know uh uh uh principle uh but essentially the curvature is due to this non non-uniform gain profile the second thing is is uh this uh this gain region is a very interesting also it it guides the electromagnetic wave. the light will go in regions where there's gain and will not go in regions where there no gain or in other words if light escapes into regions where there's no gain it's going to basically you know get get I mean it will not come back it will not be regenerated it'll be lost forever so this mechanism is also called gain guiding essentially you can guide the light in with regions which have gain so for example on on on the top of a wafer if you want your light to kind of go in like this way you can put put down a

[27:29] strip or contact and inject current you know in that direction and the light will kind of flow that way because this is called gain guiding and uh uh uh in a laser you essentially you form a long strip. Uh but as you inject more current what happens is the current kind of starts spreading out a little bit further out and so the beam also spreads out a little bit. So as you inject more current the shape of the beam changes and then this is one of the undesirable features of a gain guided laser because because essentially if you don't confine the light in the lateral direction the beam will will will start you know kind of becoming broader as you inject more current because the current is spreading out the gain region is increasing in size. uh that is solved by uh what's called index guided lasers where essentially what you do is you kind of etch down here and then you grow another region on the side regrow another region on the side with different refractive index so that you can find the light again in that direction. Those are much more expensive because it involves a lot more processing and regrowth and all that but highly desirable for extremely precise

[28:31] you know lasers which do not you know which do not waver when you inject more current you know so so that's that's uh pretty useful called index guided but the more simpler version is the gain guided uh uh lasers here um uh let me see uh what else do I want to mention here okay so that's that's uh uh the point I wanted to get across uh are there any questions I think I'm going through a little bit on a survey mode now but uh this is very important feature and based on all that we talked about we have talked about in the course it should hopefully make sense uh you know uh based on the principles we have discussed in this course uh okay so uh the next topic is uh design of mirrors uh and we had discussed earlier that you can take a semiconductor block and you can kind of etch cleave a facet of it it's a crystal so it can cleave along atomically smooth plane and then you can have reflection from this difference in the refractive index n_sub_1 and n2 being air so you

[29:34] can have difference of refractive index but then I think you also know that uh you know for a semiconductor the maximum reflectivity you can get out of here is roughly 30% because the refractive indices are typically like two or three max you know not max but in that order two to three and air is one so you get n1 - n2 by n1 plus n2 squared reflectivity of 30%. Kind of roughly u but that's that's a etched facet uh mirror. Uh but you can do actually much better. Uh you can use what's called a distributed brag reflector which is essentially a periodic grating of uh uh of different refractive indices n1 n2 and n1 n2. It's it's it repeats uh and uh uh uh by carefully choosing the thicknesses of this n1 and n2 and I'll just briefly discuss that what you know what is the choice uh window that you have here by carefully choosing them if you have light going through every time there's a mismatch in refractive index there's a little bit of a reflection now

[30:34] this mismatch may be very small it can be even 1% this region could have a refractive index of 3.1 and this could could have region 3.0 and zero. So I mean or or even smaller than that but by repeating the periods many times you can get close to 100% reflectivity using you go from 30% here to 100% there you can reflect it by designing uh you know giving it a number of periods uh you can do it either in a vertical geometry in a vixel or you can do it laterally in a edge emitting laser al as well by just etching a grating like this. That's I mean you etch a grating on the side. So you have a laser region. You have these gratings on the two sides and that's what's going to reflect it back. This is a DBR or distributed brag reflector. Uh and and uh uh the reflectivity spectra of this brag reflector it's not a mirror for all wavelengths. It's it's a mirror only for specific wavelength. It has a pass you know reflectivity band a band over which it reflects very highly. But if you go

[31:35] outside that band it can transmit almost 100% if you just go outside of it. So essentially you want to choose a laser wavelength somewhere inside here so that you you know make use of the 100% reflection that you have designed it for. So this plot here which is the reflectivity of a DBR like this or like that is turned upside down and plotted here you know and here's your uh uh you know reflectivity which is unity if you might and here's your gain spectrum. So you want to select a mode that's right at the middle of this percent you know window over which you're getting the reflectivity where light is getting reflected. The reason you're using the DBR mirror is to reflect light back into the gain medium again to give the feedback, right? And you you're doing much better now than your just etched facet where you get 30%. Right? And and uh uh so both in plane uh and and a vixel you can use them in both and they are used in both in commercial devices today. So, so uh and and just as a a quick again uh um estimate of what sort of how do you

[32:36] get this large reflectivity this is actually a very classical problem almost in electromagnetic theory where if you have a light wave going through and you have a refractive index mismatch every time there's a mismatch there's a little bit of reflection and then there's transmission reflection transmission and and so on and if your period here is say some quantity lambda spatial period or distance and your refractive indices N1 and N2. Uh so essentially if you track the electric field that you know is formed here uh due to reflections because of the first reflection you get let's say electric field that was incident at an amplitude E not and uh uh so you you essentially add up all the amplitudes of electric field you get one reflection with minus J 2 beta this I mean this is the beta is 2 pi by wavelength again And then you have two you know from here and then from here two reflections u

[33:39] beta* 2 this plus essentially uh you get this uh four and you get a a geometric series sorry 3 4 so essentially this distance you know has zero then 1 2 3 4 and so on you get this electric field amplitude that looks like this. I think you know that if you reflect all of them and you add them just in phase then you get a huge reflection right and this is a unique property of waves uh not so much of classical particles but as long as you have waves you can reflect and you can have a certain condition under which you have current reflection and they all all the reflections essentially add up and there's nothing transmitted. So, so you can always do that in a wave and that's because your whole electric field amplitude you can do the geometric sum here would look like 1 minus e to the power you know if you have n such periods j n * beta * this whole quantity over beta this you know so so you get

[34:41] like a sync function and if you choose your uh uh you know the thickness which is you know if J beta * this is 2 pi * an integer then you get co reflections and uh uh just and and then uh this this essentially means that your uh thickness should be lambda by two of the light uh times an integer right and then essentially uh as long as you meet this criteria uh within a few periods maybe 10 or 15 periods you can recover 100% reflection. Yep. But so light comes right and there's always going to be some transmission and some reflection right. Yes. So each each but then for example when when you reflect on the second wall um it's going to reflect and then it's going to reflect back right. Yes. Absolutely. So essentially it's going to reflect back and you can continue adding those things as well you know. Okay. So absolutely I mean yes in fact uh um if

[35:43] you go back and look at our cavity problem when we studied the cavity we kind of took that into account. So I'm kind of saying it's the same problem really except now you have a periodic cavity where you have a periodic array of mirrors rather than just one except the difference is each mirror has a very small reflectivity maybe 01 even very small reflectivity and then by putting enough of them in a periodic array you can retain get back 100% reflectivity over a small window that's that's the message here you know and then that's the distributed bag reflector okay Okay. So uh uh and and uh quite a bit of design goes into this uh choosing the right refractive indices and choosing the right thicknesses. But as long as you meet the criteria, you can get a narrow band over which you get 100% reflectivity and then that's a great mirror for onchip direct integration on chip. Uh and uh okay so so now one if you can do that you can actually do a lot of very interesting things. For example, you can take a laser uh which

[36:44] is emitting let's say at 15 30 nanometer. These are communication lasers like the lasers that feed in photons into optical fibers close to 1.55 micron or 100 you know 1550 nanometers close to that. We can start with that and you can put a DBR on the side you know where you know this is the DBR that is kind of you have etched down and you have created a grating and the light goes out and gets reflected right but the DBR itself you can actually change the refractive indices N1 and N2 by injecting a separate current into that you can change the refractive indexes N1 and N2 of this DBR region so that's a separate injection current than the laser which is giving you a gain and all that but this is mirror what What you're doing by do uh by changing the refractive indices n1 and n2 of this dbr is you are you are shifting the center frequency of this. You're changing the wavelength over which it reflects. You're tuning it. Basically you make a tunable mirror. It's a tunable mirror which where the reflectivity wavelengths or frequencies over which it reflects 100% is not tunable. So essentially

[37:45] you're moving this spectrum to the left or to the right here now. So you can select out different modes of the laser now. Right? And that's called a tunable laser. And uh here's an example of a so essentially when you inject different amounts of tuning current your laser is lazing at 1529 it switches to 1528 27 over so you can you know by by injecting different currents and this is extremely useful for what's called wavelength division multiplexing or WDM where you have you know essentially here for example I can have 15 channels of information transfer and each is at a different wavelength so so you can do that now by by tuning the mirror uh wavelength now. Yeah. Uh now uh this the the uh other thing I mean once you combine them and take it into a system sort of picture uh today what what is used is multiple channels. So essentially you'll have many lasers maybe 40 lasers here each operating at 40 Gbit per second. They're feeding in information uh and and then you twe it in optical fiber and there are different

[38:46] wavelengths. Maybe this one is is at 15 you know here and you know another one is there. So you have all these different lasers that are feeding in signal to the optical fiber. Uh all of them you know kind of are operating slightly different injection currents or you know such things and it goes into the fiber and then you have this all the signal going in optical fiber and the photons are going across and they don't talk to each other because the fiber is you know linear and it doesn't let them talk to each other. They go separately as different lanes in a highway for example. And then when you receive them, you have a semiconductor optical amplifier which is essentially a laser again without the cavity, without the mirrors. So it just has gain you just regenerate the photons and then then you feed it into a photo detector array again 40 maybe and each photo detector is tuned to the wavelength that that's come in for example one photo detector tuned to that wavelength one to that and you get this huge amount of data transfer this way. So this is this is a optical uh communication system. Uh we have transmit uh module is based on

[39:49] lasers and receive module is based on photo detectors and the channel is based on optical fiber with some gain elements like S SOAS which is a semiconductor optical amplifier. This is a communication system uh for using light and it's heavily used. I think a large chunk of emails we sent and you know online transactions are done this way today. uh and uh uh but as you know it's never enough people are this is not enough we still today we can't uh stream a movie real time while I'm walking on on the street with the phone right it's possible but still still we can't do it because there are limitations to the speeds and and number of channels you can multiplex and all that sort of thing so um okay so uh the last thing I want to talk about in the in the application arena is uh we talked about how do you increase the output power of a laser But what we did was kind of not quite fair. Basically what we said is I'm not going to let the laser operate continuous wave. I'm going to do some time domain and I you know I I I I'll basically uh um do uh mode locking. I'll

[40:53] do all these things. Essentially I'm I did we didn't talk about how to increase the CW or continuous wave output power of a laser. We talked about we do mode locking or you know other techniques where where you uh get large amounts of power but very short amount of time. uh one way uh and and that's really because of inherent limitations of of each laser. For example, each semiconductor laser diode would output probably you know a few tens of mills or maybe 100 millatt you know if you but then you can always take many of them and have an array of them and you combine them. Now right now the combining of the output of many laser arrays is not a trivial task because each laser has its own coherence own phase and all that sort of thing. But the problem is very similar to what you call is power combining of an antenna. So because you know lasers really came from the idea of lasers came from microwave electronics where you have a lot of say metal arrays. This these used to be the old TV antennas and then you feed into each of them an AC

[41:54] signal and then you create a radiation pattern you know let's say so this this array of antennas is going to radiate primarily in that direction and then you'll have a little lobe here and there and all that but it'll primarily radiate in that direction by changing the phases of these antennas you know the currents that you feed into these antennas you can beam steer it can turn it around you know and then all that that's what is used in radar detectors today uh you know looking for enemy aircraft or you know some stuff from space or whatever right uh so these are used for these are in a microwave domain where you have uh you know individual metal arrays of antenna antennas sometimes also these days uh transistors are used here for for transistor microwave amplifiers and you can create radar arrays like that but for lasers slightly different because uh the photons here need to be become coherent with the photons there and that's not a trivial task. No, these are like you know a lot of coupled oscillators here and the way it's done

[42:54] uh and and this you can buy in the market today. Here's a company product laser tel that takes an array of uh 1 2 3 4 I don't know maybe about 10 lasers side by side and you take the light output from the uh uh it's called a broad area laser diode array bald uh array of many lasers and you take the light out and you very cleverly what you do is take the light out from one and you kind of do mirrors and gratings and reflect it back and you you feed in the light from one to the other and other and so on. So you kind of kind of mis combine them such that they end up locking completely their phase all all the phases of of each each individual laser starts locking into into the other. And then by combining many of these laser diode separate emissions you can get one center frequency uh one laser with roughly equal to the sum of all the outputs you know I mean it's not exactly always lose some in this process but uh you can combine them. So you get a module now with much higher CW power which has perhaps eight or 10 of these

[43:54] lasers in an array. But you can do that. I mean the the these uh uh were a challenge but now you can you can you know people have developed techniques to or optics uh to develop uh to to be able to power combine on uh on a small enough module. I mean it's not on chip but it's somewhat large. So the the optics is large the laser itself is very small. So yeah. Okay. So uh that's for increasing the amount of power. Okay. So that's my the end of my survey of chapter 13 sorry chapter 12 which is uh the waveguiding and you know how do you take it to uh towards applications. So uh what I want to do for the last 5 minutes today and the next class is uh talk very briefly about two things which uh we uh have kind of accepted uh ad hoc or we didn't try to ask very deep questions about the heart of the physics of semiconductor lasers and that is the Einstein A and B

[44:55] coefficients. So we said that in an Einstein a coefficient in any laser or any optical system for that matter if I have N2 atom sitting in an excited state I have an Einstein a coefficient that looks like that right uh it's it's telling me how fast will these atoms decay right it's a rate of decay and then I have the B coefficients uh uh you know and two uh and then you have the photon field and Then you have a B coefficient for absorption and 1 * the photon field. So we have uh earlier part uh in all our discussions till now we have said that the a and a b are related. We know the ratio a by b you know is related to wavelength and 8 pi hq h bar and all that. But what is a? We said we can measure it experimentally. You did in your lab assignment, right? But how do you get it kind of from first principle from either classical mechanics or from

[45:56] quantum mechanics? Can you get a and the surprising thing is we'll see that you can get a the Einstein a coefficient relatively easily by classical mechanics. uh and and and uh I'll just show that you know classical sorry classical electromagnetic theory not classical mechanics but classical electromagnetic theory but the a coefficient is extremely difficult to get by quantum mechanics till you go into what's called quantum electronamics where the electromagnetic field has to be also quantized not just the atoms and all that on the other hand we'll see that from you know I'll give you just the uh kind of a survey sort of summary the B coefficient is very easy to get from quantum I mean relatively easy to get from quantum mechanics uh but kind of hard to get by classical mechanics in some sense and and and then we'll see the a coefficient first from classical electromagnetic theory and that actually takes uh uh not much work to show. So so let me just uh uh talk about the Einstein a coefficient from classical electromagnetic theory. Uh the

[46:56] picture is the following. So we we we look at an atom um as uh you know you have an electron and you have the nucleus and the nucleus has a very heavy mass. The electron has a small mass and the electron is obviously attracted by kulum attraction to the nucleus. So we can imagine there's a little spring connecting to the electron to the nucleus of the atom and there is a certain you know bore radius or the certain equilibrium distance that the electron maintains from the nucleus center and then if I kind of tweak it tweak it a little bit for example there's an electromagnetic wave that comes in and it slloshes this a little bit right the electron goes goes this way but then it says oh I'm out of equilibrium comes back and it starts doing oscillations because because it's a smash ing system right and he asked uh uh can I do some you know quantitative analysis of that let's say the amplitude over which it oscillates is delta x knot which is the pertubation to or rather

[47:57] let's call it that 2 * delta x knot meaning the amplitude is x not it can go plus or minus delta x knot and it's a mass spring system so uh uh so so we can uh write that that the if it gets displaced by a certain distance delta x at time t you know and this is changing with time because it's oscillating like that right so we can say that this is how far it is from its equilibrium position at time t and uh now the electron charge times this distance which is a displacement from its equilibrium position minus e * that is what is defined as the polarization of any material system you know polarization is basically it's a dipole. It's formed a dipole. It's electron. It's the charge on the dipole times the distance you they're separated by. This is the dipole. It's a polarization. Let me not worry about vectors and all that. It's going in some direction. This is the polarization. And because of this,

[48:58] you get a current which is rate of change of the polarization. That's the current that flows. Right? Now because it's an oscillator I'm going to make an assumption here that it has this amplitude and the frequency dependence or the time dependence goes as let's call it sign of omega 21 t where omega 21 is a certain characteristic frequency for this oscillations is basically similar to if you have spring constant k mass m omega would be kind of spring constant by mass you know kind of that thing right roughly this is the Classical mass spring system would oscillate like that. And the rate of change of the polarization is is is is therefore given by a time derivative of this quantity that just happens to be delta x knot. When you take a time derivative, the omega comes out of the sign and you get omega 21 * cosine of omega 2t. Right? So that's the rate of change

[50:00] of polarization in this material in this atom system in the with the electron kind of slloshing around a little bit. And now whenever you have such a situation that a charge is oscillating in space charge is oscillating in space it's going to radiate power. Right? This is a classical uh uh electromagnetic phenomena. Uh you can go back to what's called LMAR frequency or you know all these other other things. But uh whenever charge oscillates in space is it's radiating electromagnetic power right and that's the that's the basis of all antennas including the antennas on our cell phones metal and you oscillate the uh charge at a gigahertz it's going to radiate electromagnetic power at a gigahertz and and and and so I will kind of leave it here there's a uh simplest expression to calculate how much how is radiated by such an element uh is is uh uh given by the following

[51:00] and let me just write it down and we can end the class today here. So if I take a very small metal wire like that and I connect to it an AC signal which is driving current at cosine omega t let's say right then because the charge is slloshing back and forth you know between this to that in half cycle it radiates power and the power radiated uh power is radiated as electromagnetic wave so maybe magnetic field coming out electric field going that way E cross H out power goes out and so the power radiated by such a oscillator or herzian dipole if you might is given by this formula and this is a you know derived way before quantum mechanics and all that is given by pi uh sorry 1/3 pi * the impedance of free space time I which is the current amplitude that's driving it squared

[52:01] time let's Call it this is delta x knot the the distance of the or the length of the dipole over the wavelength which is emitted squared. That's the formula for output power of any dipole. And this is if you have taken an emac course where you get to antennas or radiation power from dipole. This is you know output power from a dipole. So let's end it here. What we'll do in the next class is show that from here and by looking at the atom we can get an expression a classical expression for the Einstein a coefficient right away in a couple of steps and then we try to make it a little more accurate go towards quantum and that will open up a whole can of worms saying we don't know this we don't know that and that will be a good place to end the course I think so okay good so let's meet on uh Wednesday those you have not picked so the assignment five graded is here please pick them up and Uh yeah. Um please start working on your lab 2. Uh which uh and and approach professor Pock to design it. Design the

[53:04] laser.